[ImGui] Add details to ImGui user guide (#2074)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/debug/imgui.md

---
linkTitle: Immediate Mode GUI (IMGUI)
title: Immediate Mode GUI (IMGUI) Gem
description: The Immediate Mode GUI (IMGUI) Gem provides the 3rdParty library IMGUI which can be used to create runtime immediate mode overlays for debugging and profiling in Open 3D Engine (O3DE) projects.
toc: true
---

> The Immediate Mode GUI (ImGui) Gem provides the 3rdParty library [ImGui](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui), which can be used to create run time immediate mode menus and overlays for debugging and profiling information in Open 3D Engine. You can use it to access existing O3DE tooling or set up your own ImGui menus for your components or other game code.

Reviewer: nit: Here we should probably refer to `ImGui` as `Dear ImGui` which is the full name of the library

Author: Sure.

One of the great things about ImGui is that there is next to no overhead when the ImGui game overlay is not visible, which is the default state. It is also very lightweight while in use. 

## Accessing ImGui menus

ImGui can be accessed by pressing the `HOME` key in the editor, game or server launchers.

![ImGui Menus in Viewport](/images/user-guide/gems/reference/debug/imgui_menus.png)

> Server launchers support ImGui if rendering is active. ImGui requires the `rhi` cvar to not be null.

You can use a keyboard, mouse or controller to navigate the ImGui menus.

### Keyboard navigation
For keyboard use the arrow keys to navigate the menus and `space` to activate or select an option.

### Controller navigation

> Controller support is disabled by default, to turn it on you can use either the `imgui_EnableController` or `imgui_EnableControllerMouse` to simulate the mouse with the controller.

Reviewer: suggestion: Should we mention these are console options (set via the O3DE console) it's not clear if you're not familiar where these options are

Reviewer: Actually just mentioning CVAR (and then a link to CVAR docs if it exists) could be helpful

Reviewer: Or just link to the section at the bottom that lists them all from here, that might be easiest

Author: Added link

> ### Controller navigation
> Controller support is disabled by default, to turn it on you can use either the `imgui_EnableController` or `imgui_EnableControllerMouse` [CVARs](#cvars) to simulate the mouse with the controller.
> 
> If using the controller then the following inputs are supported:

Reviewer 2: Suggestion for clarity. The word "controller" alone might be a bit vague for some ESL readers because of its primary definition.

```suggestion
### Game controller navigation

You can use the `imgui_EnableController` [CVAR](#cvars) to enable game controller input support, or use the `imgui_EnableControllerMouse` [CVAR](#cvars) to simulate mouse input with a game controller.

The following inputs are supported when using a game controller:
```

| Input                 | Description                                                                                                       | 
|-----------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| D-Pad                 | Move Focus / Navigation <br/>Tweak values (when activated with A) <br/> Resize Window (when holding X)            |
| Left Stick            | Scroll <br> Move Window (when holding X)                                                                          |
| X (Left Face Button)  | Tap: Toggle Menu<br>Hold + L1/R1: Focus Window<br>Hold + D-Pad: Resize Window<br />Hold + Left Stick: Move Window |
| Y (Upper Face Button) | Exit text / on-screen keyboard                                                                                    |
| B (Right Face Button) | Cancel / Close / Exit                                                                                             |
| A (Lower Face Button) | Activate / Open / Toggle <br/>Tweak values with D-Pad<br/>(+ L1/R1 to tweak slower/faster)                        |

> If using the controller as a mouse then the following inputs are supported:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following inputs are supported when simulating mouse input with a game controller:
```

| Input                 | Description               | 
|-----------------------|---------------------------|
| Left stick            | Move Mouse Pointer        |
| A (Lower Face Button) | Left Mouse Button (Btn1)  |
| B (Right Face Button) | Right Mouse Button (Btn2) |

You can adjust the sensitivity using `imgui_ControllerMouseSensitivity`

## Discrete input mode

> By default, when ImGui is visible input will be sent to both ImGui and the O3DE game. Sometimes, it is more desirable to only control either ImGui or the Game at any given time. To facilitate this, a discrete input mode has been added.

Reviewer: question: Could this say `sent to both ImGui and the O3DE game/editor`?

Author: Sure.

Reviewer: Awesome thanks Pip!

> By default, when ImGui is visible input will be sent to both ImGui and the O3DE game/editor. Sometimes, it is more desirable to only control either ImGui or the game/editor at any given time. To facilitate this, the ImGui Gem supports a discrete input mode.

Reviewer 2: Minor suggestion, using "By default" to open consecutive statements. One can be removed.

```suggestion
When ImGui is visible, input is sent to both ImGui and the O3DE game/editor. Sometimes, it is more desirable to only control either ImGui or the game/editor at any given time. To facilitate this, the ImGui Gem supports a discrete input mode.
```

        }
```

## Example O3DE Imgui tools

O3DE ships with many ImGui tools so the options you see will be dependent on the specific gems active in your project.

* [Debugging PhysX](https://o3de.org/docs/user-guide/interactivity/physics/debugging/)
* [Atom Rendering Profiler](https://www.o3de.org/docs/atom-guide/atom-sample-viewer/debug-menu-samples/)
* [Multiplayer helpers](https://www.o3de.org/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/multiplayer/multiplayer-gem/running/#running-locally-using-imgui-options)

## CVARs

ImGui uses the following Console variables (CVARs) either at runtime via the console, or by placing them in configuration. See the general [CVAR guide](https://www.o3de.org/docs/user-guide/appendix/cvars/) for more information on configuring CVARs.

| Name                             | Description                                                                                                                                                               | 
|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | imgui_AutoEnableComponents       | _Deprecated_                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer 2: Would it be better to leave deprecated cvars out of the table?

Author: I added them as they are discoverable via the console/console cvar window but seem to have no current impact. So we could omit them if preferred, leave the description blank for future maintainers, or mark them in someway to suggest they may not be functional.

Happy to take suggestion here.

| Left Stick            | Scroll <br> Move Window (when holding X)                                                                          |
| X (Left Face Button)  | Tap: Toggle Menu<br>Hold + L1/R1: Focus Window<br>Hold + D-Pad: Resize Window<br />Hold + Left Stick: Move Window |
| Y (Upper Face Button) | Exit text / on-screen keyboard                                                                                    |
| B (Right Face Button) | Cancel / Close / Exit                                                                                             |
| A (Lower Face Button) | Activate / Open / Toggle <br/>Tweak values with D-Pad<br/>(+ L1/R1 to tweak slower/faster)                        |

The following inputs are supported when simulating mouse input with a game controller:

| Input                 | Description               | 
|-----------------------|---------------------------|
| Left stick            | Move Mouse Pointer        |
| A (Lower Face Button) | Left Mouse Button (Btn1)  |
| B (Right Face Button) | Right Mouse Button (Btn2) |

> You can adjust the sensitivity using `imgui_ControllerMouseSensitivity`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can adjust the sensitivity using `imgui_ControllerMouseSensitivity`.
```

## Discrete input mode
When ImGui is visible, input is sent to both ImGui and the O3DE game/editor. Sometimes, it is more desirable to only control either ImGui or the game/editor at any given time. To facilitate this, the ImGui Gem supports a discrete input mode.

> By default, discrete input mode is off. It can be turned on in the ImGui O3DE menu, or with the [CVAR](#cvars) `imgui_DiscreteInputMode`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, discrete input mode is off. It can be turned on in the ImGui O3DE menu, or with the [CVAR](#cvars) `imgui_DiscreteInputMode`.
```

When this mode is enabled, ImGui will be given a 2nd visibility state, at this point, when toggling ImGui visibility via the HOME button or L3/R3 on a game controller, it will toggle through three states instead of just on and off.

> 1. ImGui is off - ImGui is not visible,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. ImGui is off - ImGui is not visible.
```

2. All input goes to ImGui - ImGui is visible and receiving all input.
3. All input goes to the Game - ImGui is visible but input is going to the game. This allows ImGui profiling tools and others to be visible on screen while interacting with O3DE.

> You can look at the upper right hand corner of the ImGui Main Menu bar to see the current state of ImGui input. You can also interact with this menu for some input tips.

![ImGui Input Status](/images/user-guide/gems/reference/debug/imgui_input_and_status.png)

## Using ImGui in your component

You will need to:

1. Ensure the ImGui Gem is active in your project. See the O3DE guide on [Adding Gems in a project](https://www.o3de.org/docs/user-guide/project-config/add-remove-gems/).
2. Sign up for ImGui::ImGuiUpdateListenerBus::Handler or use the `ImGuiLYCommonMenu` class as a base.

> 3. Inside the handler perform your ImGui actions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Inside the handler perform your ImGui actions.
```

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```cpp
```

        void MyImGuiComponent::OnImGuiUpdate()
        {
            // .. do imgui stuff ...
        }
```

> ## Example O3DE Imgui tools

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Example O3DE ImGui tools
```

O3DE ships with many ImGui tools so the options you see will be dependent on the specific gems active in your project.

> * [Debugging PhysX](https://o3de.org/docs/user-guide/interactivity/physics/debugging/)
> * [Atom Rendering Profiler](https://www.o3de.org/docs/atom-guide/atom-sample-viewer/debug-menu-samples/)
> * [Multiplayer helpers](https://www.o3de.org/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/multiplayer/multiplayer-gem/running/#running-locally-using-imgui-options)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Debugging PhysX](/docs/user-guide/interactivity/physics/debugging/)
* [Atom Rendering Profiler](/docs/atom-guide/atom-sample-viewer/debug-menu-samples/)
* [Multiplayer helpers](/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/multiplayer/multiplayer-gem/running/#running-locally-using-imgui-options)
```

## CVARs

> ImGui uses the following Console variables (CVARs) either at runtime via the console, or by placing them in configuration. See the general [CVAR guide](https://www.o3de.org/docs/user-guide/appendix/cvars/) for more information on configuring CVARs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ImGui uses the following Console variables (CVARs) either at runtime via the console, or by placing them in configuration. See the general [CVAR guide](/docs/user-guide/appendix/cvars/) for more information on configuring CVARs.
```
